I'm Craig Linssen, Music and
Audio Partnership Manager at Apple,
and today's session,
you're going to learn why
Mac OS X audio truly does rock.
So what we're going to cover today,
we're going to go over some
developer market opportunities.
We at Apple,
we're excited about our advancements
in the music and audio space recently.
And we'd like you to be able
to share in our success.
The market is really large,
and I'm going to go over a
couple of slides to show you
just how large that market is,
and hopefully show you some new
opportunities that you can tap
into with your applications.
We're going to cover some audio
device driver changes in Panther.
And we're going to go over the core
audio architecture design objectives.
Finally,
we're going to dive right into the
APIs and show you how to get started.
Whether you're a game developer,
a music and audio developer,
or you just want to input, output,
or process music or audio
with your application,
you're going to learn about the
APIs that you need to get started today.
So market.
The following is a slide of the
estimated number of music and audio
creators in the United States today.
At the top end of the
spectrum is the pro market.
There's approximately 50,000 aspiring,
sorry, 50,000 professionals who are doing
music and audio day in and day
out and making a living at it.
100% of those individuals are using
a computer in their creation process.
Now, in the middle end of the pyramid is
the aspiring professional market.
These are individuals who aspire
to be at the top of the pyramid.
They aren't quite making a living at it,
but they spend a lot
of money on their gear,
and it's a very large market.
However,
only about 30% of those use a computer in
their music and audio creation process.
And at the bottom end of the pyramid,
you'll see the creative individuals.
55.9 million individuals in the
United States who are creatively
inclined to do music and audio,
and they're not just going
to be doing music and audio
in some fashion or another.
These could be guitar players,
people who are just learning
to play a musical instrument,
students, DJs, hobbyists, etc.
But only about 5% of those individuals
currently use a computer in their
music and audio creation process.
And one of the things we want you
to be thinking about in today's
session is how you can be using our
core audio API services to create
applications that are easy to use,
and are going to show these individuals
how they can use a computer in their
music and audio creation process.
This represents about 26% of
the United States population.
That's one in four
individuals is your market.
It's a really big market,
and there's a lot of opportunities
there for you to tap into.
So let's drill down into it
just a little bit further.
The purple wedge that you see up
here represents guitar players.
Now, there's about 28 million guitar
players in the United States.
A lot of guitar players.
15 million keyboard players,
9 million DJs and remixers and producers,
and the rest of the pie
chart breaks down via brass,
woodwind, percussion, orchestral, etc.
And again, the point I want to drive home
here is that not a lot of these
individuals are even aware that
they can use a computer in their
music and audio creation process.
It's never been easier than
today to create a music and
audio application on the Mac.
Using our Core Audio API services,
you're going to find out
today just how easy it is.
So what were some of our
design objectives in our
Core Audio API services?
Well, two things:
ease of use and performance.
We wanted simplified user
configuration for the end user,
and streamlined development
for the developer.
Performance that was built
with the professional in mind.
In a lot of cases,
it was built with direct feedback
from the professional music and audio
developer and musician communities.
It's the most feature-rich
audio platform out there.
Core audio is multi-channel
and high resolution,
with sample rates up to 24-bit, 96k,
and beyond.
It's extremely low latency,
and we have native MIDI support built in.
If you've ever looked in
your Utilities folder,
you might have seen this
little keyboard icon up here,
which represents AudioMIDI setup.
You can configure your entire Audio and
MIDI studio with this utility.
Very cool stuff.
We have Class Driver Support,
plug-and-play support
for all of your hardware,
spec-compliant USB and FireWire
Audio and MIDI devices.
We highly encourage all the
hardware developers in the audience
to really look at making your
hardware devices spec-compliant.
It's really important.
It cuts down on your
development time and costs,
and it makes it much,
much easier on the end user.
It's plug-and-play device support.
You just plug it into Mac OS X,
and your device will work.
No need to worry about device drivers.
And finally, AudioUnits and AudioCodecs:
Apple platform standards which
extend the capabilities of the
operating system via DSP plugins,
virtual instruments, and AudioCodecs,
making it much,
much easier in your development.
Now, we're going to get into AudioUnits
and AudioCodecs in a lot more
detail in Bill's session coming
up here in just a few minutes.
But one of the biggest questions I get
from developers about AudioUnits is,
well, who uses this?
The following slide should
really speak for itself.
A really large development community
has already sprung up around AudioUnits,
and it's getting bigger every day.
There's a lot of individuals out there
who are very excited about the work
that Bill Stewart's team has done,
and he's going to get up here in just a
second and get into a little more detail.
So I'd like to bring up Nick Thompson.
He's going to talk about audio
device drivers in Mac OS X.
Thanks, Craig.
Hi, my name's Nick Thompson,
and I manage the audio driver
team in Apple's hardware division.
I wanted to kind of
give you an update on,
kind of talk about the
drivers that are in Darwin,
and how that's structured,
and also give you a little
bit of an update on what we've
done for the Power Mac G5,
and changes that you might
need to make for your product.
And then I wanted to cover class
drivers for USB and FireWire,
and point you to some resources for
when you're writing your own drivers.
So looking at the structure,
kind of a block diagram of
kernel-based drivers on Mac OS X,
they're all pretty much
based on our audio family.
When you look at the built-in drivers,
you'll see there's basically a
super-class Apple Onboard Audio,
which encapsulates most of the
common chip features for each chip.
And then we write plug-ins for
each chip specific to the platform.
So when you're looking
at the code in Darwin,
that's kind of the structure of it.
And we also develop class
drivers for USB and FireWire.
And the source code for the
USB driver is in Darwin currently.
The source code for the FireWire
driver isn't in Darwin currently.
And we're planning on getting
that in there after Panther.
For the Power Mac G5,
there's a couple of new things that
you've probably already heard about.
I think the biggest one is this is
the first computer from Apple with
built-in digital I/O for audio.
And we're really excited about this.
We've also made some improvements
to the analog section.
It's basically similar
to previous computers,
but we've added support for 24-bit data,
as well as 16-bit data,
and also added support for
different sampling frequencies.
So previously,
it was basically CD quality output.
Now you can have 44:1, 48,
32K at different depths.
And I want to talk a little bit
about some of the changes that
are needed for devices and device
drivers on the new computer platform.
The really cool thing about
the digital section is that
we do clock recovery on input.
This means that you can do bit-accurate
copies of original source material,
which, if you're a musician,
really matters to you.
The other thing, as I mentioned,
is that both on the
analog and digital parts,
we've got support for new sampling
frequencies and different sample sizes.
The connector that we use is
basically a Toslink connector,
and the specs that
cover this are up there.
It's IEC 608.74-617.
It's basically the standard friction
lock connector that you'll see
on most consumer AV devices that
have optical connectors on them.
So the back panel,
you'll see the two connectors.
We're testing with every piece of
consumer AV gear that we can find.
The cable is just the standard
TOSLINK connector that you'll
be familiar with if you've come
across optical gear before.
I wanted to talk a little
bit about AC3 support.
Obviously,
because we support digital output,
it's possible to either stream PCM data
across there or encoded streams.
There's an important thing to
know about encoded streams.
You can either output data
from all apps as PCM data,
and it's mixed together in the same
way that the analog section is today.
Or you can have one
single AC3-encoded stream,
so if you have, say, a DVD player app.
It's important to note that
you won't hear system alerts
if you're in this mode,
which we've termed "hog mode."
If you're developing PCI cards,
there's some changes that
you need to be aware of.
The biggest one is that we're no longer
supporting 5-volt signaling on cards.
And you can tell whether a card
is keyed for 5-volt signaling.
There's basically a notch
at the back end of the card.
If it has both notches removed,
it's a 3.3-volt universal card,
so you're OK.
We're encouraging you to
visit the compatibility lab,
and make sure, if you have your cards,
that they work in the new computer.
And the G5 labs are downstairs.
There's also some changes that you'd want
to make in a kernel-based device driver.
Basically, we need you to make your
drivers 64-bit safe,
and we've seen a number of drivers from
third parties that currently don't work.
If you have any questions about this,
come find me.
We're happy to work with developers
and make machines available
if you can come to Cupertino,
so that you can get your stuff working.
But basically,
there's a bunch of macros that
are kind of ambiguous right now.
They've been replaced with
specific macros for the
word size that you're using.
You also need to remove any assumptions
you have in your driver about logical
and physical addresses being the same.
When we were porting the
Apple onboard audio drivers,
we basically came across places
where we were making these
assumptions and we weren't working.
So, you know, we had a call in there,
physical to KV, which maps physical
addresses to kernel virtual.
You need to basically
work around these issues.
And then finally,
you also need to make sure that
you prepare memory for I/O.
If you do this, a Dart entry is created
and the world is good.
If you don't do this,
memory isn't where you think it is.
Talk about the class drivers a bit.
First with USB.
Basically, using our driver is going to
save you development costs.
So you should try and make sure that
if you're developing a USB device,
it conforms to the USB audio spec.
We've basically implemented support
for everything we've seen so far.
And I think the message of this slide is,
you know,
if you have a device that you're
working on with a mixer unit,
for example, let us know,
and we'll make sure that
the driver works with that.
We're also working on the
USB Device 2.0 specification,
which is kind of different to USB 2.0.
It gets a bit confusing here,
but this is basically the specification
for USB audio devices on both
full-speed and high-speed USB.
We're going to be making sure
that we provide support for those
new devices in the class driver.
If you are working on
a USB 2.0 audio device,
let us know.
We're interested in taking a
look at it and making sure that
we work with your hardware.
This year is going to be
a big year for FireWire,
I think.
We're working with a number of
developers doing FireWire products.
Again, using the standards-based driver
is great for both us and you.
It reduces your development costs.
And for us,
it makes it easier for customers.
When they buy a device,
they can plug it into their Mac,
and it should just work.
Basically,
there's kind of two flavors of FireWire
devices out there at the moment.
There's AVC devices,
and we're seeing silicon from Bridge,
Conox, and Semiconductor for those.
And there's MLan devices from
a variety of manufacturers,
including Yamaha, Korg, Atari, Presonus,
Kurzweil, Apogee,
and the list is actually growing.
And we're aiming to basically support
any silicon that anyone comes up with
that's basically class-compliant.
In Panther, we've made some changes.
The driver that we shipped in Jaguar
was essentially a driver for speakers.
We are now adding music subunit support,
so we're providing input
and output support,
different numbers of
input and output streams,
support for MIDI.
We're also working on lowering
the latency in Jitter.
This is really important to
us for a variety of reasons.
The other thing that we're doing is,
if you have a network of devices such as
an MLAN network or a network of speakers,
we're making some changes
in how they're presented.
I wanted to talk a little bit about
what happens when you hot-plug a device.
So basically, when you hot-plug a device,
it'll show up.
We'll create a unit for it.
And we'll start building
the stack that we need.
So we'll build a device reference.
We'll build an engine reference
and start linking that up.
And then we'll start building stream
references for input and output.
We're going to start building stream
rests for the output stream and
stream rests for the input stream.
What happens when you plug in
a new device right now is that
we'll create a new engine,
which is inefficient because
you're going to start getting
interrupts on each engine.
So what we're going to do in Panther is
basically start linking the whole
thing together so the entire network
is presented as a single device.
So a new device is hot-plugged.
We'll actually create a new
stream ref for the input,
but the output will be
the same output device.
So the way that this is going to
wind up getting presented is you'll
see two input devices with four
streams on them and a single output
device with eight streams on it.
So the goal here is essentially
to present a network as
a single block device,
which is the intention of MLan networks,
but it's also, for speakers,
a much more intelligent
way of doing things.
Finally, I wanted to point you at
some developer resources.
There's driver code in Darwin.
You should definitely check
out iAudio Family if you're
doing a kernel-based driver.
You should also really consider whether
your driver needs to be in the kernel.
It's possible to hook into Core Audio and
write a driver that sits in user land,
and that's often a better
way of doing things.
For PCI cards,
you do want to be in the kernel.
For FireWire,
maybe you want to be in the kernel,
maybe you don't.
You need to think about it
on a device-specific basis.
We've also got sample code in the
SDK for the Phantom Audio Driver,
which is a great place to start.
And we're looking at,
hopefully by the Panther timeframe,
getting out a sample PCI driver
for a couple of devices,
because a number of developers
have been asking for that.
And as always, you should check out the
Audio Developer page at
developer.apple.com/audio.
So that's it for drivers.
I want to introduce Bill Stewart to
talk about Core Audio.
Thanks, Greg.
[Transcript missing]
As Craig discussed earlier,
when we first started with Cordio,
we wanted to set a high
standard for ourselves to reach.
I think this was a very important
initial step to take for us because
it's extremely difficult if you
aim low and then have to scale up.
It's a lot easier if you aim as
high as you need to aim and then
you can appropriately scale back.
We really looked at what was
required from the pro audio market.
This is not to say that this is a
set of APIs that can only be used
in musical applications or pro
audio workstations and things.
It really can scale down to games
and to lower sample rates and lower
quality abstractions and so forth.
We wanted to start at this point.
We had requirements.
We had requirements for latency
and jitter that were very important
to us both for MIDI and for audio.
We wanted obviously no
restriction on sample rate,
which was a problem with
previous versions of the OS.
Multi-channel awareness
throughout the system,
not just with devices
but also with codecs,
with audio units,
with the whole way that we
think about audio in the system.
And we didn't want to
be limited to just some.
We wanted to have a small subset
of how we can represent audio data.
We wanted to have rich abstractions that
can be applied throughout the system.
And the session after this one
will go into some more detail
about how we represent data in the
different subsystems of core audio.
So let's start at the bottom and
we'll kind of work our way up.
So I'm not going to spend a lot
of time in the Cordial HAL part.
This is very much a low
level interface to devices.
There's a lot of abstraction
here for the devices,
but there's also a lot of specific
device state that you need to manage.
And if you are in a situation
where you really need to interact
very intimately with the device,
this is the API that you use.
This is in the Cordial framework.
We affectionately call it the HAL,
the hardware abstraction layer.
And you'll get all of the characteristics
of devices published here,
configuration, system device preferences,
management of the device status
and all that kind of thing.
And for MIDI,
we've got the Core MIDI Framework,
and this is really the APIs that are
published through here for transporting
MIDI data through the system,
both in and out of the
system through drivers,
as well as into application.
In Jaguar's Core MIDI,
we have a concept of virtual
sources and destinations,
and we've found that a lot of
developers from Mac OS 9 and the
MIDI services that OMS and FreeMIDI gave,
that one of the things that have
been missing from the way the
system is used is an IAC bus,
which is an Inter-Application
Communication Bus.
And this is basically just a
driver that looks at... It's a
software that looks like a driver,
but it actually gives you a way to kind
of connect MIDI between different apps,
and it looks like you're
dealing with drivers,
rather than sort of having
to do extra work to look for
virtual sources and destinations.
So this will be a new feature in Panther.
And the other thing, of course,
with Core MIDI is needing to
configure device and publish device
characteristics and so forth.
I'm going to go to the demo machine
and just... very briefly walk through
the Audio MIDI Setup application,
just as a way to kind of give you some
sense of how all this is put together.
So this is the Audio tab.
We've got the Mark the
Unicorn 896 box here.
We use different devices each year.
We've used eMagic and
Delta M-Audio devices.
We thought we'd use
the Motu one this year.
This top part of the section
here is the System Settings,
and these are the
default input and output.
They're typically the devices
that are used by apps like iTunes,
by QuickTime Player, by games.
And the user can typically
see in the sound press,
they can see like these are all
the output devices I've got,
and they can choose which one they
want to use as their default output.
And another thing we introduced in
Mac OS X was a distinction between
the device that you would use,
for playing audio on,
and the device that you would use for
things like sys beeps and so forth.
So the system output device is
the device where your beeps go.
[Transcript missing]
If I go to the MIDI section now,
I've got one USB device here from Roland.
It's an MPU64,
and it has four MIDI ins and outs.
I've got a studio set up
here and -- that's not Dre.
I'll leave that over there.
Early software.
So one of the things I wanted
to talk about with this app is
a little bit of confusion about
exactly what it's meant to be doing,
and this really reflects,
as the audio side does,
both of these apps,
if you're developing and
you're familiar with the API,
they really reflect the --
a lot of the structures that
are in the API themselves.
And so you can sort of see this as
like this is what the user sees,
but also as a developer,
we can -- just with a couple
of grafting concepts here,
we can understand what you're
seeing from an API point of view.
So this is a driver.
This driver has what is in
MIDI is called MIDI entities,
and it has four MIDI entities,
which are these pairs
of in and out ports,
and the in and out ports
are MIDI end points,
and each MIDI end point
takes a full MIDI stream,
so that's 16 channels,
and you're able to, you know,
talk to whatever is at the end
of that stream or get the data
from the end of that stream.
So this configuration here
has four MIDI entities,
and each MIDI entity has an
end point for in and out,
and what we're doing here
is describing the driver.
Now, what is out here is just three
devices that I've added by just
doing this add device thing,
and I can add a new external device,
and I'm not actually creating any
-- it's not like I'm going to really
create like a whole patch flow here.
All I'm doing is describing to
the system what I've got plugged
into what the system knows about,
which is the actual driver.
You can't really do through connections
here in the sense that that will
like just automatically route.
You have to route these with your cables.
You really just have to
route these with your cables.
So this is a very simple way of
describing to the system the keyboards
or the control surfaces or the
modules that you have on your system,
and you can save
different configurations,
and if I unplug the USB device,
the driver will go offline,
and you'll see that reflected in AMS.
And what can be done here is
so on -- rather than sort of
showing this as port 4 of USB,
you know, SMPU64,
you can actually present
by querying core midis,
APIs,
you can actually present my synth module
as the destination for that to the user.
Now the thing that's missing from
this that I'm sure many of you who
have dealt with OMS and FreeMIDI is
some way to describe what is
actually in the device itself.
If it's a Roland U-20 or U-220 thing,
what patches does it have,
and what is the current
patch banks that I've had,
what are the capabilities of the device?
We've worked with the MIDI Manufacturers
Association to describe a document
format for that using XML.
The spec has been ratified and
has passed through all of the
MMA processes for doing that.
We wanted to do this through
a body rather than as an
Apple sort of only initiative,
just to make this something that
could be broadly adopted both by
manufacturers and other computer
companies besides ourselves,
so that for the user,
there's one data format.
The document's not available
yet from the MMA site,
though it will be soon.
We're going through the final stage
of actually making the documents
clearer about what it contains,
so that it's an easy
to understand document.
You'll be able to author these XML files
yourself to describe custom patches,
and we hope that there will be
websites available that manufacturers
will publish them for their devices.
And so then the user
can see my synth module,
and it's a Roland synth module, or yada,
yada, and it's got these patches on it.
And just like with OMS and
FreeMIDI on Mac OS 9,
it should be as easy an
experience for the user on 10.
If we can go back to slides, please.
Right, so that's the bottom layers.
Let's get into AudioUnits.
So AudioUnits, we have a logo,
and that's the logo.
I have to...
took some effort, I can tell you.
So audio units and I'm going to say
that these are a generalized plug-in
format and by generalized I mean
that it has very many different uses.
It's not just for effects,
it's not just for software instruments
and what we'll do today is later on
as a demo for some other audio units
and I just want to give an overview
generally of what audio units are,
the types of audio units that
you can have and their kind of
categories and their functionality.
So how does it work?
An audio unit uses the component manager,
and we use the component manager because
it has some nice features about it.
It has discovery mechanisms.
Find next component.
You can just make this call,
and you can specify the type of
audio unit that you're looking for,
and we have different types.
Once you find the audio
unit that you want,
and you can either be doing
this programmatically or you
can present menus based on what
you've discovered to the user,
then you open that component,
and once you've opened the component,
you get back what's called
a component instance.
So you can think of a component in
object-oriented terms as a class,
specifies an API, specifies what a member
of that class can do,
and the audio unit itself is the
component instance is like an object,
an instance of the class.
And so audio unit as a type def is
type def to a component instance.
So you've opened your audio unit.
So what do you need to do to it?
Well,
it can be as simple and complex as the
type of audio unit you're dealing with,
what you want to do with it.
And the first step, really,
for an audio unit is to look
at the properties that it has.
And properties really represent,
in this kind of sense of
the property mechanism,
it's the state of the audio unit.
And so it is a general mechanism.
It's extensible.
We define property types.
You can get information
about the property.
How big is the property?
Can I read the property or
write the property or both?
I can use the property mechanism to find
out the state that the unit comes up in,
and I can change the
state of it and so forth.
And it's really the way that you manage
that fundamental state of an audio unit.
And then once you've sort of
set up the state of the unit,
then we have a second phase,
which is initialisation.
We split these up because there's
often a lot of things you might want to
discover about what an audio unit can do,
particularly if you're in, like,
a hosting environment,
before you initialise it and make it
able to render and able to do its job.
And so audio unit initialises
this concept of allocation
in order to actually operate.
And once an audio unit is initialised,
then it's considered to be
in a state to be usable.
And that is the one call that you do,
really, to use it, is audio unit render.
And I'm not going to go into the
specific details of the API for that,
but there's a lot of arguments that you
can pass to this and flags and so forth,
and they're fairly well documented
in the headers and you can
ask questions on the list.
Now, we're ready to go.
We're going to call it a unit render,
but where are we going
to get input data from?
You can get inputs for an audio
unit from two different places.
We wanted to have, with audio units,
an idea that we can connect
them up into processing graphs,
or we can use them independently,
either just one-off,
or maybe two or three,
and then I want to provide data to it,
but I don't want to have to
be an audio unit to provide
data to another audio unit.
So you can also have a callback function,
or you can have the connection.
So there's two ways that you can
provide data to an audio unit,
and at this point we're talking
about audio data to an audio unit.
And so when you call audio
unit render on an audio unit,
it's going to go, if it wants input,
and some audio units may not want input,
and we'll have a look
at those in a minute.
It'll call its input proc,
or its connection for its input data.
When that returns,
it's now got input data.
It's now got input data to process.
It processes that data,
and then you get that back
in the buffer list that you
provide to audio unit render,
and you're done.
Well, are we done?
No, not quite.
Because one of the things you want
to do when you're processing audio
is you want to be able to tweak it.
You want to be able to set
delay times differently.
You may want to be able
to set frequencies.
If you're talking about volumes,
you want to change volumes and so forth.
So all of these are considered as real
time operations on the audio unit,
things that you can do to the
audio unit while you're in
the process of rendering it.
And we abstract that into
what we call parameters.
An audio unit using the
property mechanism publishes a
list of the parameters that it
allows the user to manipulate.
It publishes things like what's
the range of the parameter,
what kind of values does it have,
maybe dB or hertz or maybe just a
generic zero to one sort of parameter.
There's a whole bunch of
different types of parameters
that an audio unit may publish.
And it really, this can,
we've seen some third party units that
have a couple of hundred parameters.
A lot of our units may be fairly simple.
They may have just two
or three parameters.
It really depends on what the unit is
doing and what the developer of the
unit wants you to be able to manipulate.
So we have effects units,
and that's really kind of the meat
of a lot of where we think the third
parties will be developing units.
In Jaguar, we ship various filters.
There's high, low pass, band pass,
high shelf and low shelf filters.
We ship a reverb unit,
and the reverb unit has quality
settings that you can adjust.
The quality really determines how much
CPU the unit's going to take at runtime,
and it actually affects the
quality of the rendering.
And for things like games and stuff,
they may be less concerned about a very
high quality and more concerned about
the load that the unit's going to take.
And we have a digital delay unit.
We have a peak limiter.
In Panther,
we've added a multiband compressor unit.
It's a four-band compressor,
and it's pretty nice, actually.
And we're not going to publish
a couple of hundred audio
units as a company ourselves.
This is, for us,
the big part of audio units is what
developers are going to do with this.
This is where it can get very
interesting and very bizarre sometimes.
To sort of summarize that, we create one,
we've got the state management,
we've got the resource allocation,
we've got the rendering,
and we've got the
control of the rendering.
Well, is that all we need?
No.
Typically,
if you've used Logic or if you've used
Digital Performer or any of these sort
of hosting environment type applications,
you want to present some kind
of view to the audio unit so
the user can interact with them.
We've published a generic view which
will just query the parameters that
the unit tells us and we'll assemble
like a bunch of sliders and that's,
you know, it's not bad but it's probably
not as good as what you can do if
you really understand your DSP.
And so a developer of an audio
unit can publish a custom
view and some of the views,
if you've seen these, are pretty creative
and pretty interesting.
In Jaguar, we only had the ability
to publish Carbon views.
In Panther,
we're adding support for Cocoa.
So you can publish a class that
implements a Cocoa protocol.
And it can be discovered from asking
the audio unit for its Cocoa view.
And a Carbon app can put a Cocoa UI up
in a separate window and a Cocoa app can
put a Carbon UI up in a separate window.
So there's not a lot of extra work on
the hosting side to deal with both of
these and we think that probably a lot
of developers will be very interested
in the Cocoa UI so it's there now.
And the other side of this is
communication and control mechanisms.
In Jaguar we have a
parameter listener API.
It's in Audio Toolbox,
Audio Unit Utilities.h and it is
an API called AUParameterListener.
I always get told off
when I'm wandering around,
but I just can't stand still
so I'm going to keep wandering.
Excuse me.
So the parameter listener,
when we were looking
at this to design this,
there's two ways that you can do this.
You can have a UI or an
app that is going to,
you know, 30 times a second or whatever,
it's going to poll for the
values of the parameters,
see if anything's changed,
and that seemed to us a less than
elegant way of dealing with this.
So we decided to do a notification
service and the notification service is
aimed at allowing anybody who's using
the app to be able to use the app.
So we decided to do a notification
service and the notification service
is aimed at allowing anybody who
wants to know about a parameter
changing on an audio unit to be
able to listen to that parameter,
to see that that parameter has changed
and then to react appropriately.
And then when they want to
set a value of a parameter,
if they just use the standard
audio unit set parameter call,
that's not going to
invoke the notification.
You need to use the AUParameterSet call
which is in this header file.
And that basically then will tell
the notification mechanism that,
you know, if you've got anyone
who's listening for this,
you better tell them about it.
We've decided to extend this a
little bit in Panther and to include
the ability to notify state changes
from the audio unit property.
And so you can do both parameter
changes and property changes
using this notification mechanism.
Now one of the important things about
audio units with all of this kind of
stuff is that we're never going to
know everything that we need to know
about every possible audio unit that
every developer is ever going to write.
And so there are mechanisms in place
to be able to share private data with
private property IDs and all this
kind of thing between your audio units
and your views or this kind of stuff.
And so this mechanism can be used to
communicate that there's a need to
go and get some state that may be in
the audio unit if you're the view.
And it can be done in
a thread-safe manner.
So you can do that.
You can call this sort of
API from your render thread
as well as from a UI thread.
The other weakness that I think we had
in Jaguar with the Carbon UI is that we
had this idea if you're doing automation
that you need to know like start and
end state as you're doing automation.
And we sort of put that into
the view and that really wasn't
the right place for that.
And it kind of restricted some of the
use of it where the audio unit may
know that it's a start and end state,
not the view.
And so we added to the
Panther services for this,
this idea of a begin and end
of a parameter ramp state.
So you could imagine if
you've got a control surface,
when the user touches a control,
some of these control surfaces
are sensitive to actual touch.
So you could touch the control and
then that would be a signal to say,
hey, I'm about to start
ramping this parameter.
And the UI could reflect that
the user's touched that control.
00:19:00:00 - 00:19:18:00
Unknown So we've got a control
with the changing button in the UI.
And by putting this into the controller,
this means that we can also support
this with Cocoa UIs as well as
Carbon UIs without having to add
additional logic to the Cocoa UI.
So I think this is a very
nice addition to this.
And as I said before,
this is real time thread safe and
we'll continue to work very hard
to ensure that that remains true.
[Transcript missing]
One of the things that we're working on,
this is to address some concerns
that were raised by Waves,
who are a very large developer
of audio processing plugins.
And they wanted to have a
way to do offline rendering.
Offline rendering is typically
done when you want to actually
process a file of data,
and you want to look at the
whole contents of the file,
not just in real time.
All of the AudioUnit development that
we've done up until this particular unit
is really aimed at working in real time.
And so it has constraints about
having to work in real time.
You need to report latency.
You need to report how long it takes
you to process sounds in terms of the
time delay between input and output.
With an offline unit,
you need to be able to look at the data,
all of the data that you're going to
be asked to process before you process.
So there are two render
phases with an offline unit.
There's an analyze phase,
and then there's a render phase.
So if you think of reversing
the sample order in a file,
you need to actually start at
the end and work your way back.
If you think of an offline
unit that may normalize,
you need to look at the whole audio
data before you start to process
it so you can do the normalization.
There are not really any
additional API changes for this.
There are a couple of different flags.
There are a couple of properties that
are specific for an offline unit.
There's a new audio unit type AUOL,
audio unit offline.
It's not in your Panther headers
yet because we're still revising
and discussing this with Waves
and some other companies.
This will be published in Panther and
we're getting pretty close.
If people are interested,
they can contact me and I'll
send them the spec and the code
that we've got at the moment.
We will ship an audio unit that
does reversal in the SDK at some
point as an example and there
will be code there as well as to
how you host these offline units.
Okay,
so when I said generalized audio unit,
we're still sort of like in the
general field at the moment about
normal types of audio units.
Now, let's look at some abnormal
type of audio units.
And one of those types is mixer units.
So in Jaguar, we had two mixers,
a stereo mixer that takes mono
or stereo inputs and gives you
a mixed single stereo output.
And in Jaguar as well, we had a 3D mixer.
The 3D mixer will take multiple inputs.
It will have a single output,
and it will be in either two-,
four-, or five-channel output.
And the four-channel
is like a quad setup,
which is pretty much what
we've got in the room today,
and 5.0, where we don't actually do the
3D stuff into the LFE channel,
we just do the five channels.
And what you can do with
this 3D mixer is quite a lot.
You can pan and localize
within a 3D space.
You have a number of on/off options.
And I'll get Chris Rogers to come up,
and we're just going to give you a
fairly quick demo of the 3D mixer.
Well, thanks, Bill,
for setting me up there.
Last year, I gave a more complete
demonstration of the 3D mixer,
but some things have changed since
last year because developers have
made some requests of the mixer.
So we put some new
features into the 3D mixer,
and we can have a look right here.
What I have right here
is a simple little app,
simple little user
interface onto the 3D mixer,
and it has a number of different
controls for choosing the type
of rendering for the source.
In this demo,
there are going to be three sources,
or there can be up to three sources,
and you can choose equal power panning,
simple spherical head model,
an HRTF model,
and these first three are for
rendering to stereo output,
and then the last two,
sound field and vector based,
those can be used for stereo, quad,
or 5.0.
Then over here,
we have some check boxes that let
certain features of the mixer be enabled
or disabled for individual sources.
Down here we have master volume control.
And here this is kind of an
obscure slider that controls
distance attenuation.
That is when sources -- when
sound sources get farther away,
they get quieter.
But how much quieter do they get,
say if they're 10 meters
away or 100 meters away,
how much quieter do they get?
This can control what that
curve is at the falloff.
And that's a feature that
developers have been asking for.
Down here in this part of the display,
we have some meters,
which the 3D mixer now
supports live metering.
You can meter the input
levels and output levels,
both RMS power and peak levels.
And metering is something that we
put into a couple of our audio units,
and later on today we'll see
that new audio unit matrix
mixer also supports this,
which is kind of interesting.
So maybe I should just
bring a source in and
[Transcript missing]
Maybe I've turned all my sources off.
Okay, here we go.
So, I'm using vector-based
panning right here,
and I've turned these sources off,
so we're not listening to those,
we're just listening
to this blue one here.
But if I put this dot right here,
then we're essentially
just in the center channel.
Hold on,
we have the helicopter coming in,
I'm sorry.
There he is.
Let me turn him off.
OK.
I think now maybe our meters
will show this a little better.
OK.
So, I'm about straight ahead here.
I should be coming out
of the center speaker.
And the channel ordering
down here is left,
right, surround left, right, center.
[Transcript missing]
Okay.
Now, let me change this sound.
[Transcript missing]
It looks like we're running
a little bit short on time,
so I'll try to wrap it up here.
Basically,
The new features that are the most
important are the ability to turn
off or on individual features here.
And that affects the performance
that you're going to get.
This distance filter is a lowpass
filter that makes sounds sound more
muted as they're getting further away.
And some developers had
some comments about that,
that they didn't necessarily want
their sounds to get more muted.
So there's a way that that
can be turned on or off.
And any of these characteristics
can be turned on or off separately.
And as far as performance goes,
we've made some
optimizations to the mixer.
And to give you an idea of the
kind of performance that you can
get for an individual source using
equal power panning and stereo,
I think on a pretty modest
machine like an 800 megahertz G4,
you can get a single equal power
source -- -- -- -- -- -- at,
I think it's 0.18% of the CPU.
And HRTF, which would be our high-quality
stereo panning mode,
that's at about .55%
of the CPU per source,
so a little tiny bit
more than half a percent.
Now I have a... We'll just move on,
because we're running out of time.
Okay.
Go back to the slides.
Thank you, Chris.
The other demo that
we were going to show,
but we're running a bit short,
is a very speed unit,
and that's also new in Panther,
and you're able to have your
sound come into the very speed,
and it can go faster or slower.
It can go kind of a chipmunk effect.
We'll show you that later on.
We'll be in a lab tomorrow
from 1:00 to 6:00,
the QuickTime lab, and we can give you a
demo there if you like.
Okay.
So in Panther as well,
we have a matrix mixer.
Matrix mixer is a very powerful beast,
and we'll be going into some detail
about that in the next session.
All mixers have metering
capabilities in Panther,
so you'll see some of
that in the next demo,
next session.
The other type of audio unit
that we have is a converter unit.
We'll be talking about the audio
converter in the next session as well,
and this brings some of the
functionality of the audio
converter into the audio unit world.
Essentially, all of the conversion
operations to do with PCM audio,
so sample rates, bit depths,
channel mapping, and so forth.
And all of this is
configured with properties,
and actually,
there's very little configuration
of it for you to do because just
describing to the audio unit what
your input and your output format is,
is enough to tell the converter
what work it should do.
The Converter Unit's functionality is
included as a part of the Output Unit.
The Output Unit is
interfaced to a device.
There is no additional latency,
there is no runtime cost to you
for dealing with the Output Units.
You can manage how much work
the Output Unit does for you by
seeing the difference between
the format of the device,
which is on the Output Unit,
and the format that you provide it.
In Jaguar, we only did output,
and now our output units do input,
so that's why they're
RabbitEars output units now.
In Panther,
the output units will do output
as they do in Jaguar on bus one,
and on element one or bus zero, I mean,
on element one or bus one,
you can do input.
And so what does this look like?
It looks like this.
So I'm going to use the slide.
You know,
they hate us using these things,
but I love it.
So here's your output unit.
On the output side,
here is your device output,
and this is on bus zero,
and then this is either a
callback or a connection that
you make to the audio unit,
and this is if you're using this unit,
this is what you're doing today.
In Panther, you can also see if
there is input available.
There's a property to query that,
and then the device's input is actually
on the input side of the output unit.
Confused yet?
It took me a while.
And then the application actually
calls audio unit render for bus one,
and that's where it gets
the input from the device.
And it can do the
conversion for you as well.
So if your device is 20 channels
and you only want four channels,
then it will remove those 20 channels
and just give you the four channels,
and you can tell the output
unit which four channels that
you want from the device,
including rate conversion,
all this sort of thing.
And if your device just has input,
and you need to know when to get input,
then you can get a callback,
and it will tell you, hey,
the input's ready, go and get it.
And so that's new in Panther.
Thank you.
Okay, so audio units,
we talked about connection,
we talked about wanting to be
able to connect all these up
and we have a structure in the
audio toolbox APIs called AUGraph
and the AUGraph manages the
connections between these units.
It'll manage the state,
it has a very abstract representation
of the graph and then the graph itself
has a couple of different states.
You open the graph and that'll basically
open the audio units that you've
described as being a part of your graph,
then you can initialize them and then
you can actually start the graph running.
And you can update the state of
the graph while it's changing.
You can make or break connections,
you can have a bunch of audio
units sitting off to the
side that may be one channel,
one chain into a mixer or something and
then you can just connect that chain in,
play your sound, disconnect it and the
graph will do all of this.
It'll manage the different
threads of the thread that
you're doing the rendering in,
the thread that you're doing the
state management from and it'll
just make this a lot simpler to do
than you can write your own code
but if you're going to do this,
it's a good API to look at.
Another API in the toolbox
is the Music Sequence API.
Music sequences are a collection
of events and there's really two
different types of events and we
have two different types of tracks.
They're still just basically a track.
A music sequence has
some concept of tempo.
Music sequences talk about their
timing in terms of beats and so a tempo
describes how many beats per second.
If you want to deal in seconds,
you can just make a sequence with the
tempo event of 60 beats per minute
and then you can deal in seconds.
And then you've got any number of events
tracks and the events tracks can take
any number of different types of events.
You can have MIDI events,
you can have user events where you
can put your own data in there and
you can have parameter events so
you can talk directly to particular
parameters on different audio units.
And of course the connection is
that you have a sequence and you
connect that up to a graph and
we'll show you that in a minute.
You can create a sequence
from a MIDI file,
or you can create a
sequence programmatically.
You can once created a sequence,
you can save the sequence
off to a MIDI file.
We'll only save the MIDI type events that
are in that sequence to the MIDI file,
obviously.
We won't do the other ones.
And you can iterate over the events.
You can loop, mute,
solo tracks when you're playing them.
And you can copy, paste, insert,
edit them, and these can be edited while
the sequence is actually
being applied in real time.
And you can target the tracks that are in
a sequence to two different destinations.
You can target them to a specific
AudioUnit that's in a graph that
you've attached to the sequence,
or you can target a sequence's
track to a MIDI endpoint,
so you could be sending from
a sequence that you're playing
directly out to a MIDI device.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so they're the four frameworks:
Core Audio for drivers,
Core MIDI for MIDI.
The AudioUnits really,
that framework just publishes the API for
the extendable AudioUnits and Codecs,
and then the toolbox for formats, files.
We'll be talking a lot about the
format stuff in the next session.
Wrap-up.
Roadmap, there's some of the sessions.
We have the Audio and
QuickTime session tomorrow,
which is going to be a
very interesting session,
I think, for you to go to.
Feedback forum for us is after then,
and Nick and Craig and myself
and others will be there.
Who to contact?
And for more information,
we've got the Audio Technologies for
Mac OS X website,
developer.apple.com/audio.